# Data Management Plan

DRAFT - This is the development version of the Jornada Basin LTER Data Management Plan for the 2020 LTER proposal submission. It is based on past JRN plans, [CAP LTER's plan](https://github.com/CAPLTER/informatics-documentation/tree/master/CAPIV_data_management_plan), and other LTER site plans.

## Introduction

The core goals of the Information Management (IM) system at the Jornada Basin LTER (JRN) are to support and enhance scientific investigations and data collection, and to make data and other JRN scientific products openly accessible to the scientific community, resource managers, policy makers, and the public. We are meeting these goals by addressing five IM priorities: (1) design and implementation of efficient systems to collect, quality-assure, document, and archive research data; (2) annotation of research data with complete, standardized metadata; (3) timely publication of data and metadata in accepted research data repositories; (4) promote and facilitate discovery and re-use of JRN research data; (5) advance sound data management and sharing practices at JRN through leadership and educational activities. The lead Information Manager and other staff use diverse technological resources to advance these priorities. Monthly meetings between the IM staff and 3 JRN PIs allow oversight of IM activities and development of new goals and procedures.

[_Darren makes the point that the section below could be expanded a little with point-by-point changes made to JRN IM. e.g. Website and EDI in sync, sharing and documentation of IM responsibilities, more rapid publishing. Good point, we should, but there could be some overlap with the "Response to reviewers" section of the proposal._]

In 2018, NSF awarded JRN a probationary 2-year LTER grant instead of a full 6-year award, in part due to IM deficiencies identified during the proposal review. The 5 priorities listed above were developed in response to the comments received in that review. The recently-hired lead IM (Greg Maurer) has established a number of new standards and procedures for JRN data management, and consistently interacts with LTER Network IMs to learn about additional technologies, standards, and best-practices that can be incorporated into the JRN IM system. The lead IM communicates this knowledge with JRN researchers and staff so they may be aware of, and compliant with, NSF, LTER Network, and JRN data policies. We anticipate that recent modifications to our personnel and practices, as described below, will greatly improve JRN data management and restore our role as a leader in LTER Information Management in coming years.


## IM resources

__Personnel__: The JRN "IM team" is headed by the lead Information Manager (G. Maurer). Maurer is supported at 1.0 FTE by JRN and brings a combination of ecological research experience and data management skills to the project. Maurer is the primary point of contact and overseer of the JRN IM system. Darren James (USDA Statistician, and former interim IM) and Haneen Omari (NMSU Database Analyst Associate) each work approximately half-time assisting Maurer with quality assurance, documentation, and publication of data packages. James and Omari also contribute to development of IM standards, procedures, and the JRN website. Maurer additionally collaborates closely with John Anderson (JRN Research Site Manager) and Geovany Ramirez (NMSU Research Associate Professor) to quality assure data, assemble metadata, develop IM tools, and publish data packages. Scott Schrader and Ken Ramsey (USDA-ARS Physical Scientist and Database Analyst, respectively)  maintain servers, shared network resources, and the JRN website.


__Computing and storage infrastructure__: A range of computing resources are used by JRN to meet its IM requirements (Table 1). The USDA-ARS Jornada Experimental Range (JER), headquartered in Wooton Hall on the NMSU campus, provides and manages most of the computing resources JRN requires, including a cluster of 5 servers with a 100TB storage block. From this cluster, a virtual Ubuntu 16.04 server hosts the JRN website, and JRN is provided with CIFS shares for networked file storage. Most JRN research data, IM-related metadata and tools, and staff files and documents (e.g., images, equipment manuals, procedures documents) are stored on these network shares. Other virtual servers (on the same cluster) provide additional resources used by JRN, including an R Shiny application server and a MySQL database being tested for research data storage. Upkeep of, and additions to, this computing equipment are handled by USDA-ARS staff and NMSU's Information and Communication Technologies Office, with assistance from JRN as time and LTER funding allow. All server and network share files are backed up on a 6-hour schedule, and full, system-wide, off-site backups using tapes occur monthly. Periodic technology transfers that update hardware, software, and file formats help JRN ensure long-term data protection against media or format obsolescence. Files not stored on network shares may be stored in Dropbox, Google Drive, or other secure cloud platforms depending on project needs. The overall purpose of JRN's IT infrastructure is to provide diverse, secure, and resilient capabilities for storing and serving information needed by JRN personnel, external collaborators, and the public.

**Local/remote resource** | **Software applications**  | **Implemented service**
:------------------ | :--------------------  | :-----------------------------------------------------------
Dell R710 server cluster | Citrix Xen Hypervisor | Miscellaneous virtual server hosting
Dell R710 server cluster | Ubuntu Linux 16.04, Apache HTTP Server, Drupal 7 | JRN website
zotero.org, server cluster | Zotero, Javascript, Drupal | Bibliography (on JRN website)
EDI, server cluster | Javascript, Drupal | Data catalog (on JRN website)
Local storage, server cluster | CIFS | Network file storage (documents, research data, metadata)
Dropbox, Google Drive | | Misc. document storage

Table 1: JRN computing resources, software, and implemented services used for Information Management.

__Network infrastructure__: All Wooton Hall servers and JRN staff computers are connected to a Gigabit local area network (LAN), which is linked to the NMSU network (Gigabit Ethernet) through a firewall. Internal networked systems and web applications are password-protected, and regular security sweeps identify security threats. The Jornada field headquarters (centrally located at the LTER research site) is linked to the NMSU network via a 40 MB multi-hop, point-to-point wireless backhaul connection for large-volume data (e.g., streaming meteorological and phenocam data). Research instruments at remote field sites are connected via 900 MHz spread spectrum wireless radios to base stations at field headquarters. This network allows communication with dataloggers and other research devices to be initiated from anywhere with internet access. Wireless internet at Jornada field headquarters provides internet access to on-site dormitories and offices.


## Elements of the JRN IM system

The JRN IM system consists of several interrelated components providing the critical functionality to create, manage, and distribute research data, metadata, and ancillary information. The lead IM maintains a public GitHub organization (Jornada-IM) with repositories that document the structure, standards, and procedures of the JRN IM system, and where the IM team develops software tools for data management. The important components of the JRN IM system are described below with explanations of how they are accessible to the public. The JRN IM system integrates with all stages of the DataOne data life cycle (<https://www.dataone.org/data-life-cycle>), which are identified in parentheses in section headings below.

__Data collection and quality assurance (Collect, Assure)__: Research data generally enters the JRN IM system by three routes: (1) manual collection of core, long-term datasets by the 3-person JRN field crew, (2) autonomous data collection by sensor networks and dataloggers maintained by JRN, or (3) submission of data collected by investigators, students, or collaborators not directly managed by JRN. For the first two categories, data are collected on a regular schedule that varies depending on the project, and the site manager (Anderson) is responsible for archiving raw files, data entry/transcription, and production of quality controlled files suitable for publication. To optimize efficiency, custom applications (in Excel and MATLAB) automate quality control at the time of data entry/transcription. For the large amount of autonomous meteorological data JRN collects, we have recently adopted the GCE toolbox (<https://gce-lter.marsci.uga.edu/gce_toolbox>) and extended its functionality with custom MATLAB tools. JRN also uses the USDA-developed DIMA database (<https://jornada.nmsu.edu/monit-assess/dima>) installed on field tablets, which permits data quality control at the time of collection. For the third category of incoming data, data collectors are asked to submit quality-assured data and metadata to the IM team at the close of the project, or annually for long-term research. The IM team then archives data and applies an additional layer of quality control with custom R scripts during the data publishing phase.


__Data packaging and publishing (Describe, Preserve)__: A primary function of the JRN IM system is to create and distribute research data packages, consisting of quality-assured data and detailed metadata, to public, online data repositories. There is considerable variety in data type (tabular, spatial, image, etc.), structure (variables, resolution, etc.), and source (long-term monitoring, JRN investigators, cross-site collaborators, etc.) among our data packages. All JRN data packages are therefore documented with detailed metadata by creating an XML metadata file formatted to the EML 2.2 schema (<https://eml.ecoinformatics.org>). Data packages are published to the EDI data repository through the Provenance Aware Synthesis Tracking Architecture system (PASTA+; <https://portal.edirepository.org>) whenever possible. Data packages held at EDI now constitute the de-facto JRN data catalog, and the IM team is currently working to add any missing or new packages to EDI. For data packages that are more logically archived in public repositories other than EDI (AmeriFlux, for example), we publish a "metadata only" package in EDI with links to the outside data holding, allowing discovery of all JRN data packages through one catalog.

At the time of data package publication, the IM team error-checks data files, outputs the data to an accepted data format if needed, and generates an EML file. Metadata in the EML file is populated according to LTER Network best practices, including the LTER Controlled Vocabulary and Standard Units Dictionary, and according to the JRN IM team's own metadata standards, which are documented and under development at the Jornada-IM organization on GitHub. The IM team consults with data providers during this process to ensure that complete, accurate, and high-quality metadata are obtained for all data packages. EML creation is accomplished using custom R scripts that use the eml_assemblyline and EML packages for R (developed by EDI and rOpenSci, respectively). Upon upload of EML and associated data entities to EDI, the consistency and integrity of JRN data and metadata is checked by the PASTA+ system. Following upload, data and metadata files for all data packages are archived in a secure network share in the format suggested for the eml_assemblyline package.


__The JRN website (Plan, Discover)__: The JRN website (<https://jornada.nmsu.edu/lter>) is the central means of exposing our research, education, and outreach activities to JRN scientists and staff, external collaborators, and the public in an accessible and user-friendly way. It serves as a clearinghouse for JRN information and the gateway for discovery of and access to JRN data. Computing resources and software powering the website are described in Table 1, and are primarily maintained by USDA staff, under the supervision of the JRN IM team and PIs. The most important elements of the JRN website are:

* _Site background and current research_: The combined research history at JRN LTER and USDA JER reaches back over a century, and JRN has many long- and short-term research and monitoring projects currently underway. This complex scientific enterprise can be challenging to communicate to new personnel, collaborators, data users, and the public. For this reason, site descriptions, research vignettes, maps, instructions for new researchers, and other interpretive materials are made available on the JRN website. These are revised and updated to reflect new research results, changes in priorities, or other developments at JRN.

* _Data catalog_: The JRN data catalog can be browsed and searched with the data catalog tool on the JRN website ([link](https://landscapedatacommons.org/data_cat)), where data package links lead to the package landing page on EDI. The website data catalog queries the EDI repository directly  ([JRN query](http://portal.edirepository.org:80/nis/simpleSearch?defType=edismax&q=*:*&fq=-scope:ecotrends&fq=-scope:lter-landsat*&fq=scope:knb-lter-jrn&fl=id,packageid,title,author,organization,pubdate,coordinates&debug=false)) using the PASTA+ API, meaning search results from the website data catalog always reflect the current JRN holdings on EDI.

* _Personnel database_: The JRN personnel database is maintained on the website. Personnel records in the database store position and funding details, contact information, publication lists, and biographical details, and are updated twice yearly at a minimum. Cooperating staff and scientists in the co-located USDA-ARS Jornada Experimental Range and outside collaborators all have records in this database. 

* _Publication list_: The lead IM maintains a bibliography containing all Jornada Basin LTER publications, including peer-reviewed journal articles, book chapters, reports, and theses. This bibliography is managed with Zotero (<https://zotero.org>) and new publications are identified through reporting by investigators and the Site Research Manager, annual reports, and Google Scholar searches or alerts. This bibliography can be browsed and searched using a tool on the JRN website ([link](https://jornada.nmsu.edu/lter/publications)).

* _Synergistic activities and partnerships_: JRN participates in a number of education and outreach initiatives directly and through partnerships. These include workshops and courses, development of applications and training material, and cooperative agreements with management agencies or community groups. These initiatives are either hosted directly or linked to on the JRN website.


__Data access policies (Preserve, Discover)__: In adherence with the guidelines for Type I data provided in the LTER Network Access Policy, JRN publishes all research data no later than 2 years after collection or at the time of publication. At present, no Type II data is collected at JRN. Detailed spatial location data for sensitive research sites (in unsecured areas of the Jornada Basin) are withheld from public metadata but can be requested from the IM team. Most JRN data packages are published with the Creative Commons "CCBY" license. The JRN IM system ensures that all packages in the data catalog are publicly accessible in three locations: the JRN website data catalog, the EDI repository (in PASTA+), and the DataOne metadata aggregator (<https://search.dataone.org>) through EDI's membership.


## Additional IM activities

__IM integration with research (Plan, Describe, Integrate, Analyze)__:

[_This is still to be revised and decided - IM is not currently very integrated with research (experimental design, data collection, interpretation, publications, for example) except maybe in educational spheres and DSIS team is not really formal to my knowledge. But, I have put in a few ideas here_]

The IM team works closely with JRN investigators, students, and collaborating scientists to ensure that research meets our data management standards and obligations. Members of the IM team consult with investigators in the early stages of research projects to design and implement data management plans that ensure efficient, accurate, and complete collection of data and metadata. At the time of publication, the IM team helps researchers format and revise metadata for addition to the JRN data catalog. The IM team maintains web pages in the Jornada-IM GitHub organization that are targeted at JRN researchers and distribute instructional materials on data and metadata best practices, metadata templates, tutorials for accessing and citing JRN data, and documentation of the JRN IM system (including this document).

Members of the IM team participate in JRN research as scientists in several capacities. The lead IM is a member of the JRN Data Science team, which will develop the data and analytical capabilities proposed for the Data Science Integration System (DSIS), which is envisioned to generate informatics and ecological research products such as synthetic datasets, new models and methods, and peer-reviewed journal articles. Members of the IM team may also work directly with investigators in the analysis and interpretation of JRN research data and contribute to JRN publications. The lead IM has the latitude to collaborate with LTER Network IMs and scientists in the conception, writing, and publishing of articles in ecological informatics and cross-site synthesis.


__Education and outreach__: The lead IM strives to make sound data management a highly visible priority within the JRN project, and makes every effort to provide data management education and resources to our researchers. The lead IM gives a data management presentation each year to JRN students and collaborating researchers at the Jornada Desert Ecology Short Course, and presents at invited seminars to JRN-affiliated lab and student groups. The lead IM and other IM team members communicate regularly with investigators to track research progress, identify opportunities to submit data and metadata, and raise awareness of current and developing LTER Network data management practices and expectations. The co-located USDA-ARS Jornada Experimental Range supports several applied science projects that are developing ecological data and informatics capabilities (Southwest Climate Hub and Landscape Data Commons, for example) and the lead IM anticipates that future collaborations with these groups will enable shared development of data management and informatics tools, best practices, and educational curricula of interest to JRN and the LTER Network.


__Network participation__: The lead IM maintains the goal of actively contributing to the LTER Network's IM activities in several capacities. At present, Maurer is a participant in the LTER IM "Non-tabular data" working group that is developing best practices for publishing data packages with non-standard data types, including UAV image and hyperspectral data, photographic datasets, ecological models, and genomic or other "omics" data. Maurer has recently begun working with EDI software developers with the goal of contributing bug fixes and improvements to the eml_assemblyline R package. We anticipate that future IM work at JRN will be presented at conferences, training sessions, the annual IMC meeting (Maurer attended for the first time, James for the second, in July 2019), and in peer-reviewed journal articles.

## Recent accomplishments and future initiatives

__Milestones in the current funding cycle__: In the past five years JRN was somewhat deficient in its IM practices, which led to a probationary 2-year LTER award granted by NSF in 2018. Since this probationary award, JRN has focused its efforts on developing new IM practices that are compliant with NSF and LTER standards, and on updating the JRN data catalog. Milestones we have reached in the past year are:

1. We developed metadata content and formatting standards that can be applied consistently to all JRN data packages.
2. We updated data and metadata for all "core" long-term data packages, ensuring that package metadata is consistent with the newly developed standards.
3. JRN released a major revision of our website with updates to interpretive material, a new data catalog, and a new JRN bibliography.

__Future initiatives__: The JRN IM system has become much more robust and effective over the past year, approaching our goal that information management at JRN must meet or exceed all LTER Network standards and expectations. The lead Information Manager is now working to identify further improvements to the system. Planned improvements during JRN VII include:

1. Research and data management forms and tracking will be moved to an online application hosted on the JRN website.
2. We will prioritize updating data and metadata in completed, short-term, student, and other data packages that have recently been neglected in the JRN data catalog.
3. We will develop and populate a new metadata database, most likely using the LTER-core-metabase schema (<https://github.com/lter/LTER-core-metabase>).
4. A longer term initiative for JRN is to develop the capabilities needed for DSIS, as outlined in the current proposal. Steps toward this goal include further enhancements and standardization of project metadata, creation of a database system for tabular research data, and development of data harmonization and analytical applications using R and Python.
